## YEAR: 1973 Citations: 96
### Title: **Telepsychiatry: psychiatric consultation by interactive television**
#### Authors: Dwyer T.F.
#### Abstract: The author describes an interactive television (IATV) system set up between Massachusetts General Hospital and a medical station in Boston. The system has proven to be feasible and acceptable to individuals and institutions in the community, providing psychiatric skills on a much wider scale, in a more accessible way, and faster than any other system. The author delineates the implications and future uses that appropriately placed IATV links could have, such as significantly multiplying existing manpower and more evenly distributing psychiatric care without placing greater demands on manpower.
#### Journal: American Journal of Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1176/ajp.130.8.865
## YEAR: 1986 Citations: 120
### Title: **Telepsychiatry: Psychiatric consultation through two-way television. A controlled study**
#### Authors: Dongier M., Tempier R., Lalinec-Michaud M., Meunier D.
#### Abstract: Telepsychiatry (consultation carried out through 2-way interactive television) has been the object of a number of trials in the past twenty years, but to our knowledge there is no previous control study which compares CCTV and face-to-face intreviews. Various aspects of the interviews carried out on CCTV were rated on a 5-point scale in questionnaires filled out by: patients; consultees and; consultants. No significant difference was elicited with control interviews in respect to patients' diagnosis, age and sex. CCTV interview ratings by consultee and consultant were rated only slightly below those of the control group. Such findings should encourage a broader application of interactive CCTV, particularly as a complement to live consultations in distant areas.
#### Journal: Canadian Journal of Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1177/070674378603100107
## YEAR: 1995 Citations: 59
### Title: **Telemedicine--clinical applications in mental health.**
#### Authors: Kavanagh S.J., Yellowlees P.M.
#### Abstract: Video conferences and the Telepsychiatry applications allow for an alternative approach to service delivery in rural areas. They rely heavily on user support and access to a suitably wide network. The ISDN transmission medium is capable of excellent audio and visual quality, but the consequence of this high grade quality is higher transmission costs. Our experiences have so far been positive. No patient has refused to use the medium, nor has any patient walked out of an interview without returning. It is possible to assess patients with a wide range of psychiatric disorders from personality disorders through to frank and severe psychosis. It is hard to see how the system could be used for formal insight oriented dynamic psychotherapy, but there is no reason why it should not be used for review type case management assessments and consultations as discussed in this paper. The interviewing techniques used on Telemedicine require further evaluation but are exciting and interesting, and can probably teach us a great deal about how we might improve our clinical interviewing style. The difficulties in providing equitable services extend beyond access to country centres. Low population densities and cultural diversity, typical for much of remote Australia, demands an alternative approach for effective service provision. While video conferences cannot solve the inequity in service delivery, they can work as a useful adjunct to current service delivery strategies.
#### Journal: Australian family physician
#### DOI: nan
## YEAR: 1996 Citations: 40
### Title: **Videoconferencing in psychiatry: A survey of use in northern Norway**
#### Authors: Gammon D., Bergvik S., Bergmo T., Pedersen S.
#### Abstract: A survey of the use of videoconferencing in mental health care was carried out in northern Norway. A questionnaire was distributed to all user institutions in northern Norway at the same time that ISDN became available, in mid-1995. The questionnaire completion rate for locations recorded as participants in videoconferencing sessions was 62%. Within six months, a total of 1028 persons had participated in 140 videoconferencing sessions from 35 institutions. The purposes of videoconferencing included meetings (50%), supervision, training and teaching (31%), clinical consultations (14%) and tests or demonstrations (5%). The alternative forms of contact which videoconferencing replaced included travel (59%), no contact (25%), telephone (14%), and mail or fax (2%). No problems were reported in 55% of the sessions; in 19% there were audio problems, in 14% there were picture problems, in 5% attempts to connect failed and in 5% disconnection occurred. The majority of users (87%) reported that they were satisfied or very satisfied with the facility; 8% were uncertain and 5% were less satisfied or totally dissatisfied. Continued surveying will provide longitudinal data on the diffusion of telepsychiatry in northern Norway.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: 10.1258/1357633961930068
## YEAR: 1997 Citations: 77
### Title: **Telepsychiatry: 'Tele' yes, but what about the 'psychiatry'?**
#### Authors: Baigent M.F., Lloyd C.J., Kavanagh S.J., Ben-Tovim D.I., Yellowlees P.M., Kalucy R.S., Bond M.J.
#### Abstract: To investigate what is lost or gained in a psychiatric evaluation when it takes place via telepsychiatry we compared the inter-rater reliability between two psychiatrists interviewing 63 subjects in an observer/interviewer split configuration in telepsychiatry and same-room settings. The measures used were the BPRS and interviewer ratings from a semi-structured interview. Patients also rated their experience. There were some clear differences between the telepsychiatry and same-room evaluations. Despite these variations, diagnoses were as reliably made by telepsychiatry. Patient acceptance of telepsychiatry was high.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: 10.1258/1357633971930346
## YEAR: 1998 Citations: 83
### Title: **Cost evaluation of a telepsychiatry service in northern Queensland**
#### Authors: Trott P., Blignault I.
#### Abstract: We conducted a simple comparison of the costs associated with delivering a mental health service by telepsychiatry and by conventional methods. The telepsychiatry rural outreach service was delivered to a mining town 900 km from the regional hospital in Townsville. When the telemedicine service was well established, 40 cases a month were seen for general adult psychiatry, four for child and adolescent mental health, four for psychology and two for forensic services. Costs and quality-of-life issues were considered. The savings to the health authority were estimated to be $85,380 in the first year and $112,790 in subsequent years, not allowing for maintenance and equipment upgrading. We also estimated a 40% reduction in patient transfers due to the introduction of telemedicine. Based on the previous year's figures of 27 transfers at $8920 each, this would produce an annual saving of $96,336 for the Royal Flying Doctor Service. The results of the study showed considerable savings from reduced travel by patients and health-care workers.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: nan
## YEAR: 1999 Citations: 71
### Title: **Evaluation of a telepsychiatry pilot project**
#### Authors: Doze S., Simpson J., Hailey D., Jacobs P.
#### Abstract: We assessed a telepsychiatry pilot project in which a psychiatric hospital was linked with mental health clinics in five general hospitals. Information was collected through questionnaires administered to patients, service providers and psychiatric consultants, and by interviews. The technology was considered easy to use by participating health-care professionals and patients, and the quality of the sound and picture was adequate. Survey data suggested acceptance and satisfaction on the part of patients, service providers and psychiatric consultants. An economic analysis indicated that at 396 consultations per year the service cost the same as providing a travelling psychiatrist (C$610 per consultation); with more consultations, telepsychiatry was cheaper. Information gathered during the evaluation suggested that the use of videoconferencing for psychiatric consultations was a viable option for an integrated, community-based mental health service.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: 10.1258/1357633991932379
## YEAR: 2000 Citations: 161
### Title: **A randomized, controlled trial of child psychiatric assessments conducted using videoconferencing**
#### Authors: Elford R., White H., Bowering R., Ghandi A., Maddiggan B., St John K., House M., Harnett J., West R., Battcock A.
#### Abstract: We used a PC-based videoconferencing system to conduct child psychiatry assessments. The telecommunications link was six digital lines, giving a total bandwidth of 336 kbit/s. Twenty-three patients (aged 4-16 years), accompanied by their parents, completed two psychiatric assessments, one via videoconferencing and another face to face (FTF). The order of assessments was randomized. Questionnaires were used to record the diagnosis, treatment recommendations and the psychiatrists', patients' and their parents' satisfaction with each assessment. An independent evaluator concluded that in 22 cases (96%) the diagnosis and treatment recommendations made via the videoconferencing system were the same as those made FTF. The psychiatrists stated that videoconferencing assessments were an adequate alternative to FTF assessments and did not interfere with diagnosis. However, the responses from the psychiatrist satisfaction questionnaire showed that they preferred FTF assessments. No significant difference was found in the patients' or parents' satisfaction responses after the two types of assessment. The majority of children (82%) 'liked' using the telepsychiatry system and six (26%) preferred it to a FTF assessment. Most parents (91%) indicated that they would prefer to use the videoconferencing system than to travel a long distance to see a psychiatrist in person.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: 10.1258/1357633001935086
## YEAR: 2001 Citations: 150
### Title: **Resisting and promoting new technologies in clinical practice: The case of telepsychiatry**
#### Authors: May C., Gask L., Atkinson T., Ellis N., Mair F., Esmail A.
#### Abstract: New telecommunications technologies promise to profoundly change the spatial and temporal relationship between health professional and patient. This paper reports results from an ethnographic study of the introduction of a videophone or telemedicine system intended to facilitate faster and more convenient referral of patients with anxiety and depression in primary care, to a community mental health team. We explore the reasons for contest over the telemedicine system in practice, contrasting professionals critique of the technology in play with a more fundamental problem: the extent to which the telecommunications system threatened deeply embedded professional constructs about the nature and practice of therapeutic relationships. Copyright  2001 Elsevier Science Ltd.
#### Journal: Social Science and Medicine
#### DOI: 10.1016/S0277-9536(00)00305-1
## YEAR: 2002 Citations: 62
### Title: **Client satisfaction in a feasibility study comparing face-to-face interviews with telepsychiatry**
#### Authors: Bishop J.E., O'reilly R.L., Maddox K., Hutchinson L.J.
#### Abstract: We carried out a pilot study comparing satisfaction levels between psychiatric patients seen face to face (FTF) and those seen via videoconference. Patients who consented were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group received services in person (FTF from the visiting psychiatrist) while the other was seen using videoconferencing at 128 kbit/s. One psychiatrist provided all the FTF and videoconferencing assessment and follow-up visits. A total of 24 subjects were recruited. Three of the subjects (13%) did not attend their appointments and two subjects in each group were lost to follow-up. Thus there were nine in the FTF group and eight in the videoconferencing group. The two groups were similar in most respects. Patient satisfaction with the services was assessed using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-8), completed four months after the initial consultation. The mean scores were 25.3 in the FTF group and 21.6 in the videoconferencing group. Although there was a trend in favour of the FTF service, the difference was not significant. Patient satisfaction is only one component of evaluation. The efficacy of telepsychiatry must also be measured relative to that of conventional, FTF care before policy makers can decide how extensively telepsychiatry should be implemented.  2002, Royal Society of Medicine Press Limited. All rights reserved.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: 10.1258/135763302320272185
## YEAR: 2003 Citations: 39
### Title: **The effectiveness of telepsychiatry measured using the Health of the Nation Outcome Scale and the Mental Health Inventory**
#### Authors: Kennedy C., Yellowlees P.
#### Abstract: In a telepsychiatry project in rural Queensland, data were collected from 124 patients attending hospital and general practice facilities for mental health-care and then again at follow-up one year later. Thirty-two of the patients were dealt with using telepsychiatry. Two health status scales were used to measure effectiveness: the Health of the Nation Outcome Scale (HoNOS), administered by the practitioners; and the Mental Health Inventory (MHI), which was self-administered by the patients. There was a significant difference between the initial assessment and follow-up groups on most subscales of the HoNOS, but no significant difference between the face-to-face and telepsychiatry groups. Similarly, the MHI results showed a significant difference on all subscales between the initial assessment and follow-up groups, but no significant difference between the face-to-face and telepsychiatry groups. Individuals who used and did not use telepsychiatry all had improved health outcome scores on the HoNOS and MHI during the study period. Telepsychiatry was as effective as face-to-face care.
#### Journal: Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
#### DOI: 10.1258/135763303321159639
## YEAR: 2004 Citations: 197
### Title: **Treatment outcomes in depression: Comparison of remote treatment through telepsychiatry to in-person treatment**
#### Authors: Ruskin P.E., Silver-Aylaian M., Kling M.A., Reed S.A., Bradham D.D., Hebel J.R., Barrett D., Knowles III F., Hauser P.
#### Abstract: Objective: Telepsychiatry is an increasingly common method of providing psychiatric care, but randomized trials of telepsychiatric treatment compared to in-person treatment have not been done. The primary objective of this study was to compare treatment outcomes of patients with depressive disorders treated remotely by means of telepsychiatry to outcomes of depressed patients treated in person. Secondary objectives were to determine if patients' rates of adherence to and satisfaction with treatment were as high with telepsychiatric as with in-person treatment and to compare costs of telepsychiatric treatment to costs of in-person treatment. Method: In this randomized, controlled trial, 119 depressed veterans referred for outpatient treatment were randomly assigned to either remote treatment by means of telepsychiatry or in-person treatment. Psychiatric treatment lasted 6 months and consisted of psychotropic medication, psychoeducation, and brief supportive counseling. Patients' treatment outcomes, satisfaction, and adherence and the costs of treatment were compared between the two conditions. Results: Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and Beck Depression Inventory scores improved over the treatment period and did not differ between treatment groups. The two groups were equally adherent to appointments and medication treatment. No between-group differences in dropout rates or patients' ratings of satisfaction with treatment were found. Telepsychiatry was more expensive per treatment session, but this difference disappeared if the costs of psychiatrists' travel to remote clinics more than 22 miles away from the medical center were considered. Telepsychiatry did not increase the overall health care resource consumption of the patients during the study period. Conclusions: Remote treatment of depression by means of telepsychiatry and in-person treatment of depression have comparable outcomes and equivalent levels of patient adherence, patient satisfaction, and health care cost.
#### Journal: American Journal of Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.8.1471
## YEAR: 2005 Citations: 90
### Title: **Cognitive intervention for community-dwelling older persons with memory problems: Telemedicine versus face-to-face treatment**
#### Authors: Poon P., Hui E., Dai D., Kwok T., Woo J.
#### Abstract: Background: Memory complaints and decline in cognitive function are common in the elederly. Cognitive intervention has been shown to be beneficial in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, few community-based cognitive intervention programs are available in Hong Kong. The aim of this project is to examine and compare the feasibility, acceptability, and clinical outcome of a cognitive intervention program for older patients with mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia using telemedicine versus a conventional face-to-face method. Methods: Community-dwelling older subjects with mild dementia or mild cognitive impairments were recruited from a community center. A total of 12 sessions of assessment and cognitive intervention were conducted via videoconferencing or by face-to-face method. Assessment included: Cantonese version of Mini Mental State Examination (C-MMSE), Cantonese version of Rivermead Behavioural Memory test (C-RBMT) and Hierarchic Dementia Scale (HDS). Results: Twenty-two clients were recruited. There was significant and comparable cognitive improvement in clients in both treatment arms. The videoconference arm was highly accepted by the clients and the community center. Overall compliance rate of participants was above 95%. Conclusions: Telemedicine was a feasible, effective and acceptable means in providing cognitive assessment and intervention to older persons with mild cognitive deficits. Promoting such a program to other community settings would further enhance the accessibility of dementia service to the community. Copyright  2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
#### Journal: International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1002/gps.1282
## YEAR: 2006 Citations: 68
### Title: **Randomized clinical trial of telepsychiatry through videoconference versus face-to-face conventional psychiatric treatment**
#### Authors: De Las Cuevas C., Arredondo M.T., Cabrera M.F., Sulzenbacher H., Meise U.
#### Abstract: Although telepsychiatry in the form of videoconferencing has been well received in terms of increasing access to care and user satisfaction, few data on treatment outcomes and efficacy from telepsychiatry applications are available at the present time. This paper evaluates the efficacy of telepsychiatry through videoconference in the treatment of mental disorders by comparing to face-to-face conventional (F2FC) treatment. We carried out a randomized clinical trial where 140 psychiatric outpatients were randomized to either F2FC treatment or videoconference telepsychiatry (VCTP) treatment. Patients were diagnosed according to International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10) criteria using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview. Treatment involves eight consultations lasting 30 minutes over the 24-week study period. Patients received pertinent psychotropic medication plus cognitive-behavioral therapy during sessions. The same psychiatrist diagnosed and treated all the patients that were recruited from the Community Mental Health Centre of San Sebastian de la Gomera, in the Canary Islands. Change in psychiatric test scores served as the primary efficacy criterion. Efficacy was determined by comparing baseline (visit 1) Clinical Global Impressions-Severity of Illness (CGI-S) and -Improvement (CGI-I) scales as well as Global Indexes (GSI, PSDI, and PST) from SCL-90R with scores obtained at the end of the study period (week 24). Response was defined as a CGI-I score of 1 or 2. Reliable Change Indexes were computed in SCL-90R Global Indexes scores. Of 140 patients randomized, 130 completed 24 weeks of treatment. Only 4 patients dropped out prematurely from the study in VCTP and 6 in F2FC. The study involves 534 teleconsultations, 522 F2FC consultations, and more than 500 hours of clinical practice. Significant improvements were found on the CGI and SCL-90-R Global Indexes scores of both treatment groups, showing clear clinical state improvement. No statistically significant differences were observed when the efficacy of VCTP treatment was compared to F2FC psychiatric treatment efficacy. This study demonstrated that telepsychiatry treatment through videoconference has equivalent efficacy to F2FC psychiatric treatment. Telepsychiatry showed to be an effective mean of delivering mental health services to psychiatric outpatients living in remote areas with limited resources.  Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
#### Journal: Telemedicine Journal and e-Health
#### DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2006.12.341
## YEAR: 2007 Citations: 203
### Title: **Is telepsychiatry equivalent to face-to-face psychiatry? Results from a randomized controlled equivalence trial**
#### Authors: O'Reilly R., Bishop J., Maddox K., Hutchinson L., Fisman M., Takhar J.
#### Abstract: Objective: The use of interactive videoconferencing to provide psychiatric services to geographically remote regions, often referred to as telepsychiatry, has gained wide acceptance. However, it is not known whether clinical outcomes of telepsychiatry are as good as those achieved through face-to-face contact. This study compared a variety of clinical outcomes after psychiatric consultation and, where needed, brief follow-up for outpatients referred to a psychiatric clinic in Canada who were randomly assigned to be examined face to face or by telepsychiatry. Methods: A total of 495 patients in Ontario, Canada, referred by their family physician for psychiatric consultation were randomly assigned to be examined face to face (N=254) or by telepsychiatry (N=241). The treating psychiatrists had the option of providing monthly follow-up appointments for up to four months. The study tested the equivalence of the two forms of service delivery on a variety of outcome measures. Results: Psychiatric consultation and follow-up delivered by telepsychiatry produced clinical outcomes that were equivalent to those achieved when the service was provided face to face. Patients in the two groups expressed similar levels of satisfaction with service. An analysis limited to the cost of providing the clinical service indicated that telepsychiatry was at least 10% less expensive per patient than service provided face to face. Conclusions: Psychiatric consultation and short-term follow-up can be as effective when delivered by telepsychiatry as when provided face to face. These findings do not necessarily mean that other types of mental health services, for example, various types of psychotherapy, are as effective when provided by telepsychiatry.
#### Journal: Psychiatric Services
#### DOI: 10.1176/ps.2007.58.6.836
## YEAR: 2008 Citations: 93
### Title: **Practice parameter for telepsychiatry with children and adolescents**
#### Authors: nan
#### Abstract: This practice parameter discusses the use of telepsychiatry to provide services to children and adolescents. The parameter defines terms and reviews the status of telepsychiatry as a mode of health service delivery. Because many of the issues addressed are unique to telepsychiatry, the parameter presents principles for establishing a telepsychiatry service and optimizing clinical practice within that service. The principles presented are based on existing scientific evidence and clinical consensus. Telepsychiatry is still evolving, and this parameter represents a first approach to determining "best practices." The parameter emphasizes the integration of telepsychiatry within other practice parameters of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2008 by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
#### Journal: Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1097/CHI.0b013e31818b4e13
## YEAR: 2009 Citations: 136
### Title: **Patients' depression treatment preferences and initiation, adherence, and outcome: A randomized primary care study**
#### Authors: Raue P.J., Schulberg H.C., Heo M., Klimstra S., Bruce M.L.
#### Abstract: Objective: The authors examined the association of treatment preferences with treatment initiation, adherence, and clinical outcome among nonsenior adult and senior primary care patients with depression. Methods: Sixty primary care participants meeting DSM-IV criteria for major depression were randomly assigned to receive treatment congruent or incongruent with their primary stated preference. Participants received either 20 weeks of escitalopram, with monitoring by a care manager, or 12 weekly sessions of interpersonal psychotherapy followed by two monthly booster sessions. Adherence to treatment and depression severity were reassessed at weeks 4, 8, 12, and 24. Results: Participants expressed stronger preferences for psychotherapy than for antidepressant medication. Preference strength was a more sensitive measure of outcome than was congruence versus incongruence of preference with the assigned treatment. Across age groups, preference strength was significantly associated with treatment initiation and 12-week adherence rate but not with depression severity or remission. Conclusions: A continuous measure of preference strength may be a more useful measure in clinical practice than preferences per se. Future research should focus on whether and how greater facilitation of the treatment decision-making process between patient and clinician influences clinical outcome.
#### Journal: Psychiatric Services
#### DOI: 10.1176/ps.2009.60.3.337
## YEAR: 2010 Citations: 244
### Title: **Internet treatment for depression: A randomized controlled trial comparing clinician vs. technician assistance**
#### Authors: Titov N., Andrews G., Davies M., Mcintyre K., Robinson E., Solley K.
#### Abstract: Background: Internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) for depression is effective when guided by a clinician, less so if unguided. Question: Would guidance from a technician be as effective as guidance from a clinician? Method: Randomized controlled non-inferiority trial comparing three groups: Clinician-assisted vs. technician-assisted vs. delayed treatment. Community-based volunteers applied to the VirtualClinic (www.virtualclinic.org.au) research program, and 141 participants with major depressive disorder were randomized. Participants in the clinician- and technician-assisted groups received access to an iCBT program for depression comprising 6 online lessons, weekly homework assignments, and weekly supportive contact over a treatment period of 8 weeks. Participants in the clinician-assisted group also received access to a moderated online discussion forum. The main outcome measures were the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) and the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 Item (PHQ-9). Completion rates were high, and at post-treatment, both treatment groups reduced scores on the BDI-II (p<0.001) and PHQ-9 (p<0.001) compared to the delayed treatment group but did not differ from each other. Within group effect sizes on the BDI-II were 1.27 and 1.20 for the clinician- and technician-assisted groups respectively, and on the PHQ-9, were 1.54 and 1.60 respectively. At 4-month follow-up participants in the technician group had made further improvements and had significantly lower scores on the PHQ-9 than those in the clinician group. A total of approximately 60 minutes of clinician or technician time was required per participant during the 8-week treatment program. Conclusions: Both clinician- and technician-assisted treatment resulted in large effect sizes and clinically significant improvements comparable to those associated with face-to-face treatment, while a delayed treatment control group did not improve. These results provide support for large scale trials to determine the clinical effectiveness and acceptability of technician-assisted iCBT programs for depression. This form of treatment has potential to increase the capacity of existing mental health services. Trial Registration: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry ACTRN12609000559213.  2010 Titov et al.
#### Journal: PLoS ONE
#### DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010939
## YEAR: 2011 Citations: 35
### Title: **A web-based tutorial for parents of young children with Autism: Results from a pilot study**
#### Authors: Kobak K.A., Stone W.L., Wallace E., Warren Z., Swanson A., Robson K.
#### Abstract: Objective: Early intervention can significantly improve long-term outcomes for children with autism. Unfortunately, many children do not receive early intervention services due to a critical shortage of trained professionals in this area. To bridge this gap, we evaluated a Web-based parent training tutorial (Enhancing Interactions), based on evidence-based practices and utilizing the Web-based platform to maximize learning. Methods: Twenty-three parents with a child between 18 months and 6 years with an autism spectrum disorder participated. Pre-and posttest scores of parents' knowledge were used to evaluate tutorial effectiveness. The system usability scale (SUS) evaluated technical user-friendliness and the user satisfaction questionnaire (USQ), gauged satisfaction with content. Results: The mean number of correct items on the posttest significantly increased, from 12.6 to 20.4, p<0.001. The mean SUS score was 85 (standard deviation=17), corresponding to a score of "excellent." All participants found the tutorial user friendly, well integrated, and 96% (all but one participant) thought it was easy to use, felt confident using the technical features, and would use a tutorial like this again. On the USQ, all participants found that the tutorial was well organized, clearly presented, and easy to understand; that it increased their knowledge about communicating with their child; and that they felt capable of applying these techniques with their child. Conclusions: The tutorial appears effective in increasing parents' knowledge with high user satisfaction.  2011, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
#### Journal: Telemedicine and e-Health
#### DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2011.0060
## YEAR: 2012 Citations: 40
### Title: **Feasibility and acceptability of clinic-based telepsychiatry for low-income hispanic primary care patients**
#### Authors: Chong J., Moreno F.
#### Abstract: Background: The feasibility and acceptability of telepsychiatry for low-income Hispanic patients with major depression were assessed. Subjects and Methods: In total, 167 adult Hispanic patients with major depression recruited from a community health center (CHC) were randomly assigned to receive psychiatry services through a video Webcam (WEB) (n=80) or to treatment as usual (TAU) (n=87). The WEB condition consisted of monthly telepsychiatry sessions at the CHC for 6 months provided by one of two Hispanic psychiatrists using an online virtual meeting program. TAU patients received their care from their providers. Acceptability was assessed by comparing appointment keeping for primary care versus telepsychiatry, patients' perceived working alliance with their provider, visit satisfaction, and antidepressant use. Feasibility was assessed using depression outcomes, functional days (unproductive or days lost), and whether WEB and TAU patients differed in their appointment keeping. Results: WEB patients did not differ in the proportion of completed primary care versus telepsychiatry appointments and rated their working alliance with the psychiatrist and their visit satisfaction significantly higher than the TAU patients with their provider. Significantly more WEB than TAU patients used antidepressants. Although depression severity decreased faster among WEB than TAU patients, no differences were found in the overall depression score. WEB and TAU patients did not differ in the number of days that were lost or unproductive due to depression. Although WEB and TAU patients reported being willing to pay for mental health services provided by the CHC, almost proportionately twice as many WEB patients were willing to pay for telepsychiatry. Conclusions: Results show that for low-income depressed Hispanic patients, telepsychiatry service for depression is acceptable, although its feasibility is questionable. The benefits of telemedicine were discussed in terms of improving patient care in ways other than directly providing services to the patients.  Copyright 2012, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
#### Journal: Telemedicine and e-Health
#### DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2011.0126
## YEAR: 2013 Citations: 121
### Title: **Improving Adherence and Clinical Outcomes in Self-Guided Internet Treatment for Anxiety and Depression: Randomised Controlled Trial**
#### Authors: Titov N., Dear B.F., Johnston L., Lorian C., Zou J., Wootton B., Spence J., McEvoy P.M., Rapee R.M.
#### Abstract: Background:Depression and anxiety are common, disabling and chronic. Self-guided internet-delivered treatments are popular, but few people complete them. New strategies are required to realise their potential.Aims:To evaluate the effect of automated emails on the effectiveness, safety, and acceptability of a new automated transdiagnostic self-guided internet-delivered treatment, the Wellbeing Course, for people with depression and anxiety.Method:A randomised controlled trial was conducted through the website: www.ecentreclinic.org. Two hundred and fifty seven people with elevated symptoms were randomly allocated to the 8 week course either with or without automated emails, or to a waitlist control group. Primary outcome measures were the Patient Health Questionnaire 9-Item (PHQ-9) and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-Item (GAD-7).Results:Participants in the treatment groups had lower PHQ-9 and GAD-7 scores at post-treatment than controls. Automated emails increased rates of course completion (58% vs. 35%), and improved outcomes in a subsample with elevated symptoms.Conclusions:The new self-guided course was beneficial, and automated emails facilitated outcomes. Further attention to strategies that facilitate adherence, learning, and safety will help realise the potential of self-guided interventions.Trial Registration: Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry ACTRN12610001058066.  2013 Titov et al.
#### Journal: PLoS ONE
#### DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062873
## YEAR: 2014 Citations: 67
### Title: **The SmartCAT: An m-health platform for ecological momentary intervention in child anxiety treatment**
#### Authors: Pramana G., Parmanto B., Kendall P.C., Silk J.S.
#### Abstract: Introduction: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for child anxiety, although efficacious, typically requires 16-20 weekly sessions with a therapist. Brief CBT (BCBT; eight sessions) for child anxiety is promising but may have less favorable outcomes owing to reduced session time. Mobile health (m-health) has the potential to improve BCBT efficacy by delivering ecological momentary intervention to engage youth in learning and practicing CBT skills in their everyday lives (in vivo). Materials and Methods: We developed an m-health platform entitled SmartCAT (Smartphone-enhanced Child Anxiety Treatment). SmartCAT consists of (1) a smartphone application (app) that cues youth to use the CBT skills taught in sessions, (2) an online portal that allows therapists to monitor skill use, to send cues and treatment-related materials, to engage youth in real-time via secure messages, and to manage rewards, and (3) a communication protocol that allows real-time bidirectional exchange between the app and the portal. A pilot study with nine youth (9-14 years old) examined the platform's feasibility as an adjunct to BCBT. Results: SmartCAT was found to be capable of supporting BCBT for child anxiety and received positive feedback from both therapists and youth patients. Patients rated the app as highly usable (mean=1.7 on a 1-7 scale, with 1="easy"). Patients completed 5.36 skills coach entries per session (standard deviation=1.95) and took an average of 3.14 min (standard deviation=0.98 min) to complete the entries. Conclusions: A smartphone app is feasible within CBT for child anxiety. Users found SmartCAT both acceptable and easy to use. Integrating an m-health platform within BCBT for anxious children may facilitate involvement in treatment and dissemination of effective procedures. Copyright  2014, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
#### Journal: Telemedicine and e-Health
#### DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2013.0214
## YEAR: 2015 Citations: 68
### Title: **Effectiveness of a telehealth service delivery model for treating attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A community-based randomized controlled trial**
#### Authors: Myers K., Vander Stoep A., Zhou C., McCarty C.A., Katon W.
#### Abstract: Objective To test the effectiveness of a telehealth service delivery model for the treatment of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) that provided pharmacological treatment and caregiver behavior training. Method The Children's ADHD Telemental Health Treatment Study (CATTS) was a randomized controlled trial with 223 children referred by 88 primary care providers (PCPs) in 7 communities. Children randomized to the experimental telehealth service model received 6 sessions over 22 weeks of combined pharmacotherapy, delivered by child psychiatrists through videoconferencing, and caregiver behavior training, provided in person by community therapists who were supervised remotely. Children randomized to the control service delivery model received treatment with their PCPs augmented with a telepsychiatry consultation. Outcomes were diagnostic criteria for ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) and role performance on the Vanderbilt ADHD Rating Scale (VADRS) completed by caregivers (VADRS-Caregivers) and teachers (VADRS-Teachers) and impairment on the Columbia Impairment Scale-Parent Version (CIS-P). Measures were completed at 5 assessments over 25 weeks. Results Children in both service models improved. Children assigned to the telehealth service model improved significantly more than children in the augmented primary care arm for VADRS-Caregiver criteria for inattention (2[4] = 19.47, p &lt;.001), hyperactivity (2[4] = 11.91, p =.02), combined ADHD (2[4] = 14.90, p =.005), ODD (2[4] = 10.05, p =.04), and VADRS-Caregiver role performance (2 [4] = 12.40, p =.01) and CIS-P impairment (2[4] = 20.52, p &lt;.001). For the VADRS-Teacher diagnostic criteria, children in the telehealth service model had significantly more improvement in hyperactivity (2[4] = 11.28, p =.02) and combined ADHD (2[4] = 9.72, p =.045). Conclusion The CATTS trial demonstrated the effectiveness of a telehealth service model to treat ADHD in communities with limited access to specialty mental health services. Clinical trial registration information - Children's Attention Deficit Disorder With Hyperactivity (ADHD) Telemental Health Treatment Study; http://clinicaltrials.gov; NCT00830700.  2015 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
#### Journal: Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1016/j.jaac.2015.01.009
## YEAR: 2016 Citations: 45
### Title: **BEHAVIORAL ACTIVATION and THERAPEUTIC EXPOSURE for POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER: A NONINFERIORITY TRIAL of TREATMENT DELIVERED in PERSON VERSUS HOME-BASED TELEHEALTH**
#### Authors: Acierno R., Gros D.F., Ruggiero K.J., Hernandez-Tejada B.M.A., Knapp R.G., Lejuez C.W., Muzzy W., Frueh C.B., Egede L.E., Tuerk P.W.
#### Abstract: Objective Combat veterans returning to society with impairing mental health conditions such as PTSD and major depression (MD) report significant barriers to care related to aspects of traditional psychotherapy service delivery (e.g., stigma, travel time, and cost). Hence, alternate treatment delivery methods are needed. Home-based telehealth (HBT) is one such option; however, this delivery mode has not been compared to in person, clinic-based care for PTSD in adequately powered trials. The present study was designed to compare relative noninferiority of evidence-based psychotherapies for PTSD and MD, specifically Behavioral Activation and Therapeutic Exposure (BA-TE), when delivered via HBT versus in person, in clinic delivery. Method A repeated measures (i.e., baseline, posttreatment, 3-, 6-month follow-up) randomized controlled design powered for noninferiority analyses was used to compare PTSD and MD symptom improvement in response to BA-TE delivered via HBT versus in person, in clinic conditions. Participants were 232 veterans diagnosed with full criteria or predefined subthreshold PTSD. Results PTSD and MD symptom improvement following BA-TE delivered by HBT was comparable to that of BA-TE delivered in person at posttreatment and at 3- and 12-month follow-up. Conclusion Evidence-based psychotherapy for PTSD and depression can be safely and effectively delivered via HBT with clinical outcomes paralleling those of clinic-based care delivered in person. HBT, thereby, addresses barriers to care related to both logistics and stigma.  2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
#### Journal: Depression and Anxiety
#### DOI: 10.1002/da.22476
## YEAR: 2017 Citations: 25
### Title: **Generic versus disorder specific cognitive behavior therapy for social anxiety disorder in youth: A randomized controlled trial using internet delivery**
#### Authors: Spence S.H., Donovan C.L., March S., Kenardy J.A., Hearn C.S.
#### Abstract: The study examined whether the efficacy of cognitive behavioral treatment for Social Anxiety Disorder for children and adolescents is increased if intervention addresses specific cognitive and behavioral factors linked to the development and maintenance of SAD in young people, over and above the traditional generic CBT approach. Participants were 125 youth, aged 817 years, with a primary diagnosis of SAD, who were randomly assigned to generic CBT (CBT-GEN), social anxiety specific CBT (CBT-SAD) or a wait list control (WLC). Intervention was delivered using a therapist-supported online program. After 12-weeks, participants who received treatment (CBT-SAD or CBT-GEN) showed significantly greater reduction in social anxiety and post-event processing, and greater improvement in global functioning than the WLC but there was no significant difference between CBT-SAD and CBT-GEN on any outcome variable at 12-weeks or 6-month follow-up. Despite significant reductions in anxiety, the majority in both treatment conditions continued to meet diagnostic criteria for SAD at 6-month follow-up. Decreases in social anxiety were associated with decreases in post-event processing. Future research should continue to investigate disorder-specific interventions for SAD in young people, drawing on evidence regarding causal or maintaining factors, in order to enhance treatment outcomes for this debilitating condition.  2016 Elsevier Ltd
#### Journal: Behaviour Research and Therapy
#### DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2016.12.003
## YEAR: 2018 Citations: 30
### Title: **Evaluating an e-mental health program (“deprexis”) as adjunctive treatment tool in psychotherapy for depression: Results of a pragmatic randomized controlled trial**
#### Authors: Berger T., Krieger T., Sude K., Meyer B., Maercker A.
#### Abstract: Background Depressive disorders place a significant disease burden on individuals as well as on societies. Several web-based interventions for depression have shown to be effective in reducing depressive symptoms. However, it is not known whether web-based interventions, when used as adjunctive treatment tools to regular psychotherapy, have an additional effect compared to regular psychotherapy for depression. Methods Adults (N = 98) with a unipolar affective disorder were recruited in routine outpatient psychotherapy practices in Germany from therapists over the course of their initial sessions and randomized within therapists to one of two active treatment conditions: regular psychotherapy or psychotherapy plus a web-based depression program (deprexis). Primary outcome was depressive symptoms measured with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) at 12 weeks. Secondary outcomes were anxiety symptoms, somatic symptoms and quality of life at 12 weeks and six months follow-up. The study also included an assessment of the working alliance after six and 12 weeks. Results The combination of psychotherapy with the web-based program was more effective than psychotherapy alone at 12 weeks, with medium between-group effect sizes on primary depressive symptoms (Cohen's d =.51) and small to medium between-group effect sizes on secondary outcomes (Cohen's d =.07.55). Furthermore, we did not observe negative side effects in the blended format, e.g., a lower working alliance than in psychotherapy alone. Limitations The study had a smaller than planned sample size and the dropout rate at follow-up was high. Conclusions This study provides first evidence that the use of a web-based program as an adjunctive tool in regular psychotherapy could be a promising option to consider in future treatment for depression.  2017 Elsevier B.V.
#### Journal: Journal of Affective Disorders
#### DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2017.11.021
## YEAR: 2019 Citations: 5
### Title: **Prospective acceptance of distinct mobile mental health features in psychiatric patients and mental health professionals**
#### Authors: Hendrikoff L., Kambeitz-Ilankovic L., Pryss R., Senner F., Falkai P., Pogarell O., Hasan A., Peters H.
#### Abstract: Background: Despite numerous mobile health (mHealth) applications available, current impact on mental healthcare is low. Users face overwhelming variety of applications and sensors. Evidence for distinct features' effectiveness is largely lacking. Along with technical feasibility and data security issues, readiness and preferences of patients predetermine engagement and impact of mHealth in psychiatry. Objective: We aimed to assess the prospective attitudes of psychiatric patients and mental health professionals (MHP) towards mHealth applications in general and with regard to distinct features. Methods: We conducted a survey entailing 486 subjects (297 MHP and 189 patients). Results: Professionals and patients indicate both, considerable acceptance and rejection for most features. Marked concerns across groups relate to data security in general. Actimetry and geotracking were considered particularly skeptical. Importantly, most patients prefer to be prompted timely about health status changes. Conclusion: Altogether, evidence indicates substantial support for mHealth features in mental healthcare despite considerable rejection of distinct features. We conclude that tighter collaboration between researchers, developers and clinicians must address matching mHealth-apps to patients' needs. Improved information on potential risks and possibilities associated with mHealth features is strongly indicated in MHP and psychiatric patients in order to reach an appropriately informed decision on individual involvement.  2018 Elsevier Ltd
#### Journal: Journal of Psychiatric Research
#### DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2018.11.025
## YEAR: 2020 Citations: 4
### Title: **Tele-psychiatric after care clinic for the continuity of care: A pilot study from an academic hospital**
#### Authors: Das S., Manjunatha N., Kumar C.N., Math S.B., Thirthalli J.
#### Abstract: Background: There is a need of continuity of care research in psychiatric disorders to deal two important issues such as accessibility of psychiatrists, and travel. Aims: This pilot was designed to evaluate the acceptability, feasibility, possible clinical effectiveness and cost benefit of video based tele-psychiatric aftercare (TAC) clinic from an academic hospital. Methods: Fifty selected patients were recruited to provide direct video-consultations (DVC). Results: This study shows higher score on acceptability, satisfaction and respect to privacy on these TAC. Discussion and conclusions: This is first pilot study as one of the patient friendly and less expensive continuity of care.  2019 Elsevier B.V.
#### Journal: Asian Journal of Psychiatry
#### DOI: 10.1016/j.ajp.2019.101886
